---
layout: post
title: "Testing C/C++ #3: Refactoring under test"
date: 2017-10-13
comments: true
---

Now that we've got some code under test, let's discuss how a test suite can impact the effort of refactoring.

<!--excerpt--> 

[Refactoring](https://refactoring.com/) involves changing the guts of some code without impacting its behavior. This is often an effort made to clean up or optimize working functionality.

When we have code that already works in a system, the first priority when introducing changes is to not break anything. From a behavioral perspective, nothing should have changed after the code has been refactored. Performance may increase or the module may become more flexible, but existing unit tests should continue to pass throughout the refactoring process.

This can be achieved by adding refactored code alongside legacy functionality, as opposed to directly changing the code that already works. Let's look at a basic example using a [flash driver](https://github.com/fboris/STM32Cube_FW_F4/blob/master/Projects/STM324xG_EVAL/Applications/LwIP/LwIP_IAP/Src/flash_if.c).

**Note: This document is more concerned with the effect that unit tests can have on a refactoring effort than the actual practice of refactoring, so this example will be a very minimal demonstration.**

```cpp
int8_t FLASH_If_Erase(uint32_t StartSector)
{
  uint32_t FlashAddress;

  FlashAddress = StartSector;

  /* Device voltage range supposed to be [2.7V to 3.6V], the operation will
     be done by word */ 

  if (FlashAddress <= (uint32_t) USER_FLASH_LAST_PAGE_ADDRESS)
  {
    FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef FLASH_EraseInitStruct;
    uint32_t sectornb = 0;

    FLASH_EraseInitStruct.TypeErase = TYPEERASE_SECTORS;
    FLASH_EraseInitStruct.Sector = FLASH_SECTOR_5;
    FLASH_EraseInitStruct.NbSectors = 7;
    FLASH_EraseInitStruct.VoltageRange = VOLTAGE_RANGE_3;

    if (HAL_FLASHEx_Erase(&FLASH_EraseInitStruct, &sectornb) != HAL_OK)
      return (1);
  }
  else
  {
    return (1);
  }

  return (0);
}
```

This driver is similar to the one we brought under test in [a previous post](/blog/2017/10/04/testing-1), but it uses the HAL library instead of the standard peripheral library. Notice that this erase function only checks the `StartSector` parameter against the last page address, and always erases starting at `FLASH_SECTOR_5`. We would like to refactor this to be more flexible by using the `StartSector` address parameter to actually determine where the erase starts.

We'll add a `Flash_If_GetSector` function that takes an address and returns the appropriate sector based on the MCU data sheet. Before we replace `FLASH_SECTOR_5`, we want to make sure our function doesn't break anything, so we simply add another `Sector` assignment below the original.

```cpp
int8_t FLASH_If_Erase_HAL(uint32_t StartSector)
{
    uint32_t FlashAddress;

    FlashAddress = StartSector;

    /* Device voltage range supposed to be [2.7V to 3.6V], the operation will
       be done by word */ 

    if (FlashAddress <= (uint32_t) USER_FLASH_LAST_PAGE_ADDRESS)
    {
        FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef FLASH_EraseInitStruct;
        uint32_t sectornb = 0;

        FLASH_EraseInitStruct.TypeErase = TYPEERASE_SECTORS;
        FLASH_EraseInitStruct.Sector = FLASH_SECTOR_5;
        FLASH_EraseInitStruct.Sector = FLASH_If_GetSector(FlashAddress);
        FLASH_EraseInitStruct.NbSectors = 7;
        FLASH_EraseInitStruct.VoltageRange = VOLTAGE_RANGE_3;

        if (HAL_FLASHEx_Erase(&FLASH_EraseInitStruct, &sectornb) != HAL_OK)
            return (1);
    }
    else
    {
        return (1);
    }

    return (0);
}
```

If our tests pass, we know our changes did not disrupt the original functionality and we can confidently erase the obsolete line of code. At this point we can add more tests or behaviors as needed.

Refactoring is usually a much more involved process than this example suggests, so changes take time and carry a greater risk of impacting functionality. When we add new code alongside the old during development, our test suite allows us to incrementally transition to the new without fully committing to it by providing feedback at every step. This practice of leveraging unit tests to ensure that changes don't impact existing functionality is called **regression testing**.

Running a test suite regularly when touching code is a great habit to get into. One of the major benefits of having written unit tests is the ability to get near-immediate feedback when any changes are made, allowing us to focus more on improving the code and less on trying to predict potential failures.

I hope this document has demonstrated some of the flexibility of unit tests beyond green indicators on your favorite CI tool. If cultivated properly, a test suite can be a useful tool for the entire lifespan of a codebase.